.. _android-authenticate:

===================
Authenticate a User
===================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

MongoDB Realm provides an API for authenticating users using any enabled
authentication provider. Instantiate a ``Credentials`` object and pass
it to either of the  ``login`` or ``loginAsync`` method to authenticate
a user login and create a ``User`` object. Each authentication provider
corresponds to a static helper method used to instantiate
``Credentials`` objects using that authentication providers. See the
table below for a mapping of authentication providers to helper methods:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Authentication Provider
     - Credentials Generation Method

   * - :ref:`Anonymous <android-login-anonymous>`
     - ``Credentials.anonymous()``

   * - :ref:`Email/Password <android-login-email-password>`
     - ``Credentials.emailPassword(String email, String password)``

   * - :ref:`API Key <android-login-api-key>`
     - ``Credentials.apiKey(String key)``

   * - :ref:`Custom Function <android-login-custom-function>`
     - ``Credentials.customFunction(String functionName, Object... arguments)``

   * - :ref:`Custom JWT <android-login-custom-jwt>`
     - ``Credentials.jwt(String jwtToken)``

   * - :ref:`Google OAuth <android-login-google>`
     - ``Credentials.google(String googleToken)``

   * - :ref:`Facebook OAuth <android-login-facebook>`
     - ``Credentials.facebook(String accessToken)``
   
   * - :ref:`Sign-in With Apple <android-login-apple>`
     - ``Credentials.apple(String idToken)``

.. _android-login:

Log In
------

You can authenticate users with either the ``app.login()`` or
``app.loginAsync()`` methods. While the ``app.login()`` method blocks
code execution in the calling thread until the supplied credentials have
either succeeded or failed to authenticate a user, the
``app.loginAsync()`` method allows execution to continue, handling
success or failure with a callback function that is guaranteed to
execute on the same thread that called ``app.loginAsync()``.

If successful, the ``app.login()`` method returns a ``User`` object.
In the event of a failure, the ``app.login()`` method throws an
exception of type ``ObjectServerError``.

Pass a callback to the ``app.loginAsync()`` method to handle success or
failure. This callback should accept a single parameter of type
``App.Result``. If successful, the ``isSuccess()`` method of the
``App.Result`` object passed to the callback should return true. In the
event of a failure, the ``isSuccess()`` method of the ``App.Result``
object passed to the callback should return false, and you can view the
error that caused the failure using the ``getError()`` method.

.. _android-login-anonymous:

Anonymous
~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`Anonymous </authentication/anonymous>` provider enables users
to log in to your application with short-term accounts that store no
persistent personal information. To log in with anonymous
authentication, create an anonymous credential by calling
``Credentials.anonymous()`` and then pass the generated credential to
``app.login()`` or ``app.loginAsync()``.

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin

         Realm.init(this)
         val app: App = App(AppConfiguration.Builder(appID)
                .baseUrl(realmURL)
                .appName(BuildConfig.VERSION_NAME)
                .appVersion(BuildConfig.VERSION_CODE.toString())
                .build())

         val credentials: Credentials = Credentials.anonymous()
         
         val user: User? = null
         app.loginAsync(credentials) {
            if (it.isSuccess) {
                Log.v(TAG, "Successfully authenticated anonymously.")
                user = app.currentUser()
            } else {
                Log.e(TAG, it.error.toString())
            }
         }
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-email-password:

Email/Password
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :doc:`Email/Password </authentication/email-password>` provider
enables users to log in to your application with an email username and
a password. To log in with email/password authentication, create an
email/password credential by calling ``Credentials.emailPassword()``
with the user's email and password. Then pass the generated credential
to ``app.login()`` or ``app.loginAsync()``.

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin

         Realm.init(this)
         val app: App = App(AppConfiguration.Builder(appID)
                .baseUrl(realmURL)
                .appName(BuildConfig.VERSION_NAME)
                .appVersion(BuildConfig.VERSION_CODE.toString())
                .build())

         val credentials: Credentials = Credentials.emailPassword("email", "password")
         
         val user: User? = null
         app.loginAsync(credentials) {
            if (it.isSuccess) {
                Log.v(TAG, "Successfully authenticated anonymously.")
                user = app.currentUser()
            } else {
                Log.e(TAG, it.error.toString())
            }
         }
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-api-key:

API Key
~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-custom-function:

Custom Function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-custom-jwt:

Custom JWT
~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-facebook:

Facebook OAuth
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-google:

Google OAuth
~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-login-apple:

Sign-in with Apple
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java

.. _android-logout:

Log Out
-------

You can log out any user, regardless of the authentication provider used
to log in, using the ``logOut()`` or ``logOutAsync()`` methods. This:

- deletes locally stored user credentials from the device

- immediately halts any synchronization to and from the user's {+realm+}s

- marks the user's {+realm+}s for deletion the next time the app restarts

Because logging out halts synchronization, you should only log out after
all local Realm updates have uploaded to the server.

.. tabs-realm-languages::
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: kotlin
      
      .. code-block:: kotlin

         user?.logOutAsync {
            if (it.isSuccess) {
                Log.v(TAG, "Successfully logged out.")
            } else {
                Log.e(TAG, it.error.toString())
            }
         }
   
   .. tab::
      :tabid: java
      
      .. code-block:: java
